[draft] Memos (#348)
solidjs/solid-docs-next: content/essentials/memos.mdx

| Example use cases | Transforming data structures, computing aggregated values, derived state, or other expensive computations. | UI updates, network requests, or external integrations. |

## Best practices

When working with memos, its recommended that you leave them "pure". 
This means you should not modify other signals because it can lead to unexpected behaviors and make the code harder to maintain. 

```jsx
import { createSignal, createMemo } from 'solid-js';

const [count, setCount] = createSignal(0);
const isEven = createMemo(() => count() % 2 === 0); // example of a pure function
```

Since memos are expected to be pure functions, their outputs should solely depend on their inputs without side effects. 
When you add a side effect, the reactivity chain is complicated which potentially introduces infinite update loops. 

```jsx
import { createSignal, createMemo } from 'solid-js';

const [count, setCount] = createSignal(0);
const [message, setMessage] = createSignal("");

// impure function in createMemo
const badMemo = createMemo(() => {
    if (count() > 10) {

>         setMessage("Count is too high!"); // this can introduce a side effect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        setMessage("Count is too high!"); // BAD: this is a reactive side effect
```

    }
    return count() % 2 === 0;
});
```

In this example, if another part of the application reacts to the changes in the `message` signal, it can trigger further updates or side effects which complicate the flow of data and cause a possible infinite update loop. 

If there's a need to perform a side effect based on a memo's value, it's better to use an effect:

```jsx
import { createSignal, createMemo, createEffect } from 'solid-js';

const [count, setCount] = createSignal(0);
const [message, setMessage] = createSignal("");

const isEven = createMemo(() => count() % 2 === 0);

createEffect(() => {
    if (count() > 10) {
        setMessage("Count is too high!");
    }
});
```

In the revised approach, the `isEven` memo will purely compute based on whether `count` is even *without* side effects. 

> In using the `createEffect` function, the side effects are appropriately handled. 

Reviewer: Maybe worth saying something like: if the goal is to keep the message in sync with the count, to avoid multiple downstream updates, it's better still to write it as a memo:

```jsx
const message = createMemo(() => {
  if (count() > 10) {
    return "Count is too high!";
  } else {
    return "";
  }
})
```

I think showing this mentality of converting unnecessary effects (with side effects) into memos is a useful example. In general I think we want to say that memos are preferred when appropriate.

I wonder whether there should be a different, better example of side effects where effects are truly needed, like DOM updates or something.

While it is possible to use regular functions to mimic the behavior of a memo, `createMemo` offers distinct advantages:

- Unlike a [basic derived signal](/essentials/signals#derived-signals) or [effects](/essentials/effects), memos are optimized to execute only _once_ for each change in their dependencies.
This significantly reduces computational overhead.

- Where a signal is updated once but *accessed* multiple times, the memoized function will only execute once and will **cache** its results.

> - If a cached value remains unchanged despite a change in its dependencies (as determined by `===),` it won't trigger subsequent updates. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If a cached value remains unchanged despite a change in its dependencies (as determined by `===`), it won't trigger subsequent updates. 
```

> For example, with `setCount(0)`, `isEven()` updates to `true`; however, `setCount(2)` might recompute `isEven()` and will yield `true`, prompting no further updates in components relying on `isEven()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, calling `setCount(0)` and then `setCount(2)` will cause the `isEven` memo to recompute both times, but because both evaluations are `true`, the second update will not cause any further updates in components relying on `isEven()`.
```

});
```

In this updated approach, the `isEven` memo will compute based on whether `count` is even *without* side effects.

> However, to minimize unnecessary updates that occur as a result of a change, it is better practice to convert any unnecessary effects into memos.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it is better practice to convert any unnecessary effects into memos.
```

(removes repetition with the next sentence — but also fine to keep it)

> This can help to minimize unnecessary updates in other parts of the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This helps minimize unnecessary updates in other parts of the application, because it lets Solid understand the reactive dependencies and thus optimize evaluation order.
```

> And, generally speaing, opting for memos is the recommended approach over the use of effects:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And, generally speaking, opting for memos is the recommended approach over the use of effects:
```

```jsx
const message = createMemo(() => {
  if (count() > 10) {
    return "Count is too high!";
  } else {
    return "";
  }
});

```

> **Note**: In situations where side effects, such as DOM updates, are important, using the `createEffect` function should be used over a memo.

Reviewer: I wonder about a wording such as this:

> Effects still have their place, e.g. to trigger external side effects such as DOM updates.

I kind of liked your "clear separation sentence", maybe at the very end? But up to you.
